[Music]
hey you ever been on a long flight can't
sleep watched as many movies as you can
and still left with nothing to do well
time to watch the flight path but all I
can think is hey captain can you take
more of a beeline to get me from New
York to Berlin so it begs the question
why is the flight path always so curved
simple the earth is round maps are flat
unlike the actual planet which is a
sphere so the route a plane flies will
usually look curved if you were to look
at the same path on a globe however it
would look straight these straight
flight paths that look curved on a map
are ironically known as great circle
routes they account for the curvature of
the earth so what may look like an
unnecessary detour over Canada's east
coast when you're looking at a flat map
is the shortest path when flying ok
sorry captain now I get it but the great
circle is more of an optical illusion on
a map and doesn't quite explain why do
short domestic flights sometimes have
zigzag routes these flight paths clearly
have nothing to do with the simple fact
that the earth is round right right
during peak travel times in the US alone
there are as many as 5,000 planes in the
air at any given moment
that's nearly 50,000 planes over just
one country every day at high altitudes
planes must be separated by at least
2,000 feet vertically and 1,000 feet at
lower altitudes fancy satellite based
communication systems give airlines the
ability to change routes on the fly to
account for everything from weather and
wind to other planes safe travel always
takes precedence over a fast route so
what may seem like the quickest way for
a plane to travel on a map or globe will
often be overruled by navigators and air
traffic controllers another reason you
may see a plane take something of a
zigzag route is due to jurisdictions
that don't allow aircraft to fly through
their airspace such as the White House
Taj Mahal Buckingham Palace
and even Disneyland planes must then
circumnavigate these prohibited areas
and take a less than direct route to do
so why can't I use my phone in anything
other than airplane mode on a flight
well for starters it's the law at least
in the u.s. back in 1991 the Federal
Communications Commission banned in
flight use of wireless devices to
prevent network interference since then
there hasn't been much evidence to prove
that your phone messes up the airplanes
communication and navigation equipment
then again there isn't much evidence to
prove that it won't so even as
technology has advanced greatly from
when these rules were put into effect
the FAA has continued to err on the side
of caution the good thing is that many
airlines now offer in-flight Wi-Fi so
just slide that airplane mode switch to
on
and you'll still be able to watch the
latest bright side video as you jet
around the world
assuming you can hear it that is why
can't they make airplanes quieter I mean
your car has a muffler so why can't they
put that handy-dandy silencer on an
airplane well a muffler on a car works
by sending the exhaust stream from the
internal combustion engine through a
series of sound absorbing materials they
break up the sound waves it generates
but if you did the same thing to a jet
engine it just won't work the way it
needs to that stream of fast-moving
exhaust gases is how the engine
generates thrust and it's that thrust
that allows a plane to take off and fly
any kind of diffuser or muffler to a jet
engine would decrease the thrust and the
energy the engine is generating would be
wasted the loudest sound that comes from
an airplane is made during takeoff and
that has nothing to do with whether the
engines have a muffler it's more about
the sound waves that are generated from
the reaction between the extremely hot
and fast-moving exhaust gas and the cool
stationary air
how can planes take lightning strikes
yep they sure can take it like a champ
it's estimated that for each commercial
airplane currently in use that plane
will be hit by lightning at least once
per year and while any plane that struck
by lightning mid-flight always goes in
for an inspection after landing in most
cases it's perfectly fine
that's because today's aircraft are
designed and built with lightning in
mind
more specifically plane manufacturers
are very careful with how the wiring is
done when lightning does strike a plane
it usually strikes an edge of it like
the typical wing or the nose and the
electrical current leaves through the
tail this is because the airplanes body
or a fuselage acts as a Faraday cage
that's a container which blocks
electromagnetic fields the charge from
the bolt of lightning moves around the
outside of the plane and protects the
interior where you are from being
affected by the jolt
so when a plane routes around a storm it
usually has nothing to do with lightning
so much as it is to prevent turbulence
or damage to the aircraft from hail but
if a plane can fly through a storm why
can't they fly in extreme heat well as
summers get hotter flights that are
grounded due to severe heat have become
more common heat affects aircraft in
different ways hot air is not as dense
as cool air so the wings produce less
lift so the hotter the weather the
faster a plane has to go to takeoff
which requires more runway well there's
only so much runway to work with so the
only choice they're left with is to stay
on the ground for now there's also the
issue of overheating internal
electronics which tend to run hot even
on an average weather day add triple
digit temperatures and stuff tends to
break down so yeah that's why your
flight might be delayed on a hot day
why don't play Nath parachutes for the
passengers well it's a legit question
after all they have those oxygen masks
and the seat cushion is a flotation
device but what good will a floaty do
tens of thousands of feet in the air
still as it turns out parachutes won't
do you much good either skydivers
usually jump out of planes moving
somewhere between 80 to 110 miles per
hour at an altitude of 8,000 to 13,000
feet by contrast a commercial jetliner
flies around 600 miles per hour at its
cruising altitude of 35,000 feet the
math alone should show why parachutes
may not do much good on a standard
flight besides most passengers don't pay
attention to the preflight safety
instructions to know where the emergency
exit is located can you imagine how the
parachute training portion of that
announcement would go finally there's
the issue of weight parachute equipment
is heavy and if you need one set per
person there's a lot less room for
passengers granted no law says you can't
bring your own along for the ride just
don't expect to have a simple time
getting through that TSA checkpoint
why can't planes be roomier if you fly
economy you know what I'm talking about
you have pretty much zero legroom you
feel like in your neighbors personal
bubble if you put your arm on the
armrest and don't even get me started
when the person in front of me lays
their seat back oh yeah
I love watching movies with the screen
right in my face the aisles are also
Barbie size ask my elbow all about it
can't count how many times has been
bumped by the food cart it seems like
they cram as many tiny seats into that
cabinet as they can't and that's exactly
what they do like a lot of things it all
comes down to money moolah dinero go the
more seats you can fit in that means
more passengers more passengers equals
more ticket Seoul more tickets means
more money in the airline's pocket
airlines say this keeps fares down since
you're dividing the cost they pay for
things like fuel maintenance and
employee salaries
among more people but can I get a teeny
bit more legroom please
hey what are the questions do you have
about air travel let me know in the
comments below if you learned something
new today then give this video a like
and share it with a friend and here are
some other cool videos I think you'll
enjoy just click on the left or right
video and remember stay on the bright
side of life